Tim whiner
what is the Pentagon's black budget
it's the Pentagon's own term for every
program that the Secretary of Defense
the director of Central Intelligence or
the President of the United States wants
to keep off the books wants to keep
deleted from the public budget of the
Pentagon and kept at a classification of
top secret or above these are the secret
weapons and the secret policies for
compat encode war and World War three
and should it come to that world war
four who calls it the black budget the
Pentagon originated the term the term
black comes from the world of espionage
and means like a black bag job
undercover hidden from light secret when
did you first hear the term the term my
newspaper sent me down to Washington
that is what mr. the Philadelphia
Inquirer in April of 1986 and the idea
was to get behind some of the stories
we've been hearing during the months
preceding about the fantastically
expensive hardware the thousand-dollar
wrenches the $6,000 coffee pots and so
forth I obtained a copy of the budget of
the Pentagon and leaf through the
sections detailing research and
development and procurement programs the
budgets for buying new weapons there are
blank spaces hundreds of them
where dollar figures should be there
were code words or descriptions or names
the program should be I began talking to
people inside and outside of the
Pentagon and they identified this as a
problem a problem in a kind of a tug of
war between secrecy and democracy I
don't mean to over dramatize it but that
spring things we're getting out of hand
in Washington
and you had an atmosphere but secrecy
was winning the folks I talked to
focused my attention on the black budget
and I went to work philadelphia inquirer
why were they I mean you have a it's
owned by Knight Ridder you have a big
Washington bureau why would they send
you down to Washington to do something
that they're already doing well they
weren't and the editor of the newspaper
who's sadly left us recently Jean
Roberts was very intrigued by the notion
it wasn't something that was being
directly addressed and he wanted me to
dig up as much as I couldn't get it in
the paper before I had assembled enough
to write about iran-contra broke that
fall and so the context of excessive
secrecy was now something that was on
the public agenda how long had you been
in Philadelphia at the time I started
working for The Enquirer in 1982 so most
of that time was digging into corruption
and HUD programs corruption in the
Philadelphia Police Department and I
just returned from four months in the
Philippines covering the Marcos and
Aquino contest
where's home originally New York my
folks moved to California when I was a
teenager they teach at UCLA and they
brought me up to love words love books
love ideas what do they teach my dad's
field is psychosomatic medicine and my
mom's is history where'd you go to
school
Columbia College in New York and then
the Graduate School of Journalism at
Columbia when did you go originally to
journalism right after your master's
degree yep where started out working
three jobs simultaneously in New York
based in the federal and state courts
there down in Foley Square and this is
where I learned my love of documents
when you interview people as a reporter
sometimes they will lie sometimes they
will equivocate or shade their speech to
suit a private agenda but the document
like the lawyers say speaks for itself
were you a good student in college
pretty good
so you like you liked the idea of
digging in the stacks for the document
that contains the seed of fact is
integral to good journalism the idea of
coming up with words on paper or facts
on file that will give you the
underpinnings the historical basis for
writing good interpretive analytical
work that's started in college that's
started in the stacks how old are you 34
now and you've already got two Pulitzer
Prizes well a group of us at the Kansas
City Times shared a Pulitzer 1982 for
uncovering the causes of the Hyatt Hotel
disaster that happened the summer of
1981 the collapse of the sky walks in a
brand new hotel that killed 114 people
so that was a shared one and then these
stories that form the basis of blank
check we're given the Pulitzer for
National reporting in 1988 at 30 that
was 32 you're 32 years old and you got a
Pulitzer your second Pulitzer does that
as that had a what's that do to your
head well the best thing that happened
was that when my name got in the paper
old friends I hadn't heard from in years
called me up and that was the best thing
that happened I think that you run the
danger of ego mania and certainly I'm
afflicted with that disease but you have
to realize that the symbology of a prize
like that you shouldn't confuse what the
thing is represents with the meaning of
your work I just try to write good
stories and get them in the paper okay
you're addressing a bunch of college
kids and they know you've got two
Pulitzer Prize prizes at this age step
outside your own body if you can and
observe what is it that you have been
able to do that's different that got you
these prizes in college
and in the graduate school I had a few
good teachers who put a few basic values
into my head and said set a fire burning
in my belly the dictums of aya stone and
of Lincoln Steffens that one should try
and get at the roots of social and
political problems with first-hand
research and by not believing or at
least taking with a large grain of salt
the official version of events has
always driven me and I think it drives
all reporters who keep their eye on the
ball
a reporter without certain basic values
as a stenographer who simply repeats and
amplifies the official words of
officialdom and that is less than the
minimum or at minimum we should be
rooting out hidden facts and presenting
them to people so they can make their
own mind stuff about how their
government works you say in your book
that a hundred million dollars a day is
available to the President of the United
States Secretary of Defense the director
of CIA and the agencies over which they
preside without accountability to the
American people that's true this is a
system that began when the Cold War took
root in this country and one of the
ironies of the Cold War as we look back
is that our open rambunctious
contentious democracy took on a few of
the attributes of the sullen and
secretive and closed society with which
we were at war in the atmosphere of
emergency in 1949 1950 the nation
decided that it would be best to
establish permanent secret agencies in
this country for most of which was the
CIA
and that the money to run the CIA should
be appropriated secretly and should not
be questioned in effect that the
director of the CIA would get a lump sum
of money approved by one or two or three
or four members of Congress and that he
did not have to account for how that
money was spent what this meant in
practice was that the agency could hire
armies it could buy banks without
accounting to anyone in its prosecution
of the secret war against the Soviet
Union what happened in the 1980s was
that the Pentagon began to bury its
largest and most expensive weapons
technologies under the cover originally
designed for the intelligence community
two examples that have sort of nosed
their way into the light now developed
under the black budget of the stealth
bomber the nuclear b-2 bomber and a
satellite system called Milstar whose
aggregate costs if completed will
approach a hundred billion dollars there
was an obsession with secrecy that
caused the black budget to explode in
the early 1980s and it doubled and
doubled again to the point where we were
by the close of the Reagan
administration spending thirty six
billion dollars a year or roughly a
hundred million dollars a day outside
the normal channels of accountability
let me ask you the senator did senator
Sam Nunn and Congressman les Aspin
respective chairmen on each side of the
Congress over here know about this black
budget absolutely but they couldn't talk
about it
debate open debate was curtailed on
these secret weapons systems and in fact
my first week of reporting down in
Washington les aspin put out the first
public statement on the growth of the
black budget back in April of 1986 and
he said that secret weapons spending
as the Pentagon budget doubled from 1981
to 1985 had gone up Eightfold and that
it was to use his term his words grossly
excessive and that this was information
that ought to be available in a
democracy sure Aspen knew what the
stealth bomber was gonna cost but he
couldn't tell his colleagues nor could
the question be debated on the floor how
many people in Congress know about the
black budget and know know the specifics
of the black budget to have an effective
overview enough to make intelligent
rational decisions at minimum eight are
given access to every jot and tittle
that they need I mean if you're a junior
member of the Senate Armed Services
Committee senators you can get it most
of it you can get most of it or you
could go to none and ask for a briefing
do they have to testify on Capitol Hill
that they want this money to bill the b2
well now they do because a when in the
beginnings in the in the beginnings of
the stealth bomber program there were
four members of Congress who knew what
the plane was supposed to cost and the
new technical details about it now that
now of course itself is into the light
and we can see that what we've got is a
bomber design for nuclear war against
the Soviet Union that is so expensive
that you could have built each 70-ton
plane out of solid gold and still had
enough money left over to mount it on a
bed of platinum had open debate been
permitted before the stealth bomber
started rolling off the production line
I think it would have been beneficial
for this country okay let's go to the by
the way do you live in Washington now
yes indeed you get caught by a Potomac
fever I don't see myself as part of the
Washington community I see myself as a
reporter from out of town who is
standing aside and observing the
workings of government
I can think of some of my colleagues who
work for Washington institutions like
the post who I believe see themselves as
kind of the Fourth Estate as part of the
workings of government I disagree with
that approach so what happens when you
welcome to Pentagon today and they see
it coming down the hallway nothing do
they know who you are no they don't and
no one's ever said you know look out boy
get back I tend to work from the
documents that the Pentagon puts out to
use the public record to get it
something deeper the public record to
use what's public or what's been
declassified taking apart the Pentagon's
budget to determine what's black what
secret is kind of a reverse engineering
for example if you want to know the
level of secret spending in the research
and development budget you've got a
bottom line let's say it's 50 billion
dollars you add up the several thousand
unclassified line items and you'll see
that there's a 10 billion dollar gap
there so you know that 10 billion
dollars is being funneled out into
secret spending from there you get to a
deeper level by interviewing people who
have or have had access to this
information and doing a great deal of
reading as to the nuclear strategy and
technological goals that the Pentagon is
pursuing I wanted to ask you about a
line that popped out of the pages of
your book I could be charged with a
felony for telling you I thought this is
a free country where you can talk about
anything in the first in the First
Amendment protection there are code word
classification levels and the programs
discussed in that passage which are for
strategic nuclear warfare Olympic
bellwether Meridian Bernie in the reign
of director Casey at the CIA he
threatened more than a few reporters
with felony prosecutions under the
Espionage statutes
for revealing codeword programs I
seriously doubt that such a prosecution
could be successfully mounted because of
the First Amendment protections but
there remain statutes on the book the
government interprets as protecting code
word classified information and they are
effective statutes there on the books
there there is it scary enough not to
publish it no sir no sir
I think the First Amendment is stronger
in the back under acknowledgments and
you talk about coming to Washington and
not being a part of it here but you do
thank some people yes and let me read
the list and I want you to tell me if
you can who they are in Washington I
received guidance from Dina Razer mm-hmm
and Donna Martin both formerly with the
project on military procurement that is
the organization that first dug up the
raw information on the extraordinary
items that the Pentagon was producing
such as the coffee pots the wrenches the
hammers and they do and have in the past
done tremendous cost analysis of how the
Pentagon produces its weapons and they
have a network of people inside the
Pentagon who help them gather
information where do they come from they
are a privately funded and a political
group and they range from cheap Hawks
that is people on the right of the
spectrum who want the defense dollar
spent efficiently to doves who want the
defense dollar spent in more Pacific and
perhaps and less substantial ways why
would anybody want to spend money for
that purpose and what kind of money do
they get I don't know I think they're
independently funded from various
organizations like Ord Foundation or
maybe Stewart lot I really haven't
looked behind their financing but
they're respected institutions I don't
know you know this but why are they both
formerly of that project well let's see
Donna went to work for a member of
Congress
and Dena I believe is now a freelance
author did you find them or did they
find you oh I went to them and they put
me onto some wonderful people inside the
Pentagon Ernest Fitzgerald a Ernest
Fitzgerald you.thank who earn e
Fitzgerald one of the Pentagon's most
famous and staunchest in-house critics
this is the man who in the early 1970s
was fired upon the order of President
Nixon because from his post as a cost
analyst inside the Pentagon he
identified the first billion-dollar cost
overrun in Pentagon history on the c5
cargo plane where is he now he is still
inside the Pentagon he was reinstated by
order of the federal courts do they
watch the kind of people that he talks
to I believe under the court order
reinstating him he is protected from
harassment and he was helpful to you yes
what kind of help can he give you the
benefit of this is experienced guidance
on how to see weapons systems
Ernie once explained to a rapt
congressional committee that they should
see an expensive military aircraft for
example the stealth bomber not as a
single unit but as a collection of
vastly overpriced spare parts flying in
tight formation and it is images like
that that allow outsiders to gain a
greater understanding of how the
Pentagon won there's another gentleman
here by the name of Thomas Emily Tom
amli has been with the Department of
Defense for nearly 40 years he is a
highly talented weapons designer he
designed the Sidewinder 8 lethally
effective air-to-air missile and he is
also a skeptic on the subject of black
programs my first week in Washington
through the good offices of Dino razor I
was introduced to Tom Amelie we sat down
to the Pentagon cafeteria I asked him
about the problem of black programs
and he said I'm paraphrasing but he said
look there are three reasons for having
black programs this is a man with some
access to this information one you're
doing something that should genuinely be
secret there's about five of them and
stealth ain't one of them
- you're doing something so stupid that
you don't want anybody to know about it
and three you want to rip open the money
bag get out a big shovel because there's
no accountability for this money and I
remember his words vividly is he angry I
think Tom Lee is a classic example of a
patriot and he does not want the defense
dollar squandered on wild-eyed schemes
or on impossible missions or on
screwball goals he is a man who has
spent his adult life dedicated to the
defense of this country and what he
stands against boondoggles particularly
boondoggles protected under a national
security shield he's a government
employee he is worse for the Air Force
would he be allowed under the rules of
the Pentagon to come here and do a
television program with us sure thing if
you asked him about what's black he
might have to bite his tongue but he'd
be more than happy on this list you have
John Pike of the Federation of American
scientists why could they be of help to
you Pike is an expert in the overhead
reconnaissance systems the spy
satellites run by an agency called the
National Reconnaissance Office which
officially does not exist the United
States government has never acknowledged
its existence and it is forbidden to
mention the name of this agency on the
floor of the Congress how do you know
about it well through people like John
Pike and there are good offices in fact
what cannot be mentioned on the floor of
the Congress can be written about and
in fact a journalist and professor named
William Burroughs several years ago
wrote a very sober and sympathetic book
about the NRO multi black why can you
write about it but members of Congress
can't speak about it because I thought
they had the you know the the right to
say anything they wanted on them they
shall not not be held accountable right
for what they say on the floor brought
too long um because the United States
government has never acknowledged the
existence of the National Reconnaissance
Office a member who mentions its name on
the floor of the house can be subject to
sense you're in fact when congressman
Georgi Brown jr. of California dared to
question some of the NRO's spending he
came within a hair's breadth of official
censure he resigned from the House
Intelligence Committee this is simply
not done how much money do they spend
roughly seven to eight billion dollars a
year and this stuff needs to be debated
let me give you an example why a few
weeks back you remember the Hubble Space
Telescope a 1.5 billion dollar NASA
program experienced some technical
difficulties in space well that's a
subject of important debate and we need
to make sure that such mistakes aren't
repeated all right around the same time
a 1.3 billion dollar National
Reconnaissance Office satellite tumbled
out of orbit burned up over Soviet
airspace and disintegrated you'll hear
no debate about it you won't see any
public investigation of that expensive
mistake because of the secrecy
surrounding the National Reconnaissance
Office how much press has there been
about it damn little little shirttails
how come because public information on
the expenditures of public funds or what
were public funds and have been hidden
under the black umbrella is curtailed
what's that term you just used
shirttails Oh a shirttail is a little
additional story of three paragraphs or
so at the end of a larger news
her story it's sort of an oh by the way
in the story are separate half separate
little separate sub-headline all right
on the list here you have Gordon Adams
and Steven Alexis Kane of the defense
budget project what do they do for you
right around the corner these are folks
who have devoted their careers to doing
cost analysis of Pentagon programs
they're nonpartisan they are working for
more efficient spending of the defense
dollar and they were expert in Pentagon
budgeting processes and they provided me
again with the benefit of their
experience where do they get their money
I believe that again they're funded by
nonpartisan foundations what makes them
so expert experience where do they get
the experience from years of taking
apart Pentagon budgets and analyzing
them if any of them ever worked inside
the Pentagon or do you need to in order
to understand this stuff I think it
helps and they certainly are in contact
with a number of people inside the
Pentagon who give them guidance in turn
I think what you need is a clear eye a
pocket calculator and a sense of history
for starters that some others and when I
ask you about who they are you paint a
picture of a Pentagon full of people
that are on the phone every day to these
different groups giving them insider
information now doesn't work that way
again these folks work as I worked with
the public documents of the Pentagon
it's not a matter of sort of leaking
information that should be classified
you simply analyze what's public and
proceed to ask questions from there and
folks who will give you answers do so
not out of a desire to you know spread
secrets or do damage certainly to this
country certainly not bad of a genuine
concern that large sums of money are
going down a rat hole
and in this instance what I try to focus
on in the early chapters of the book are
the secret research and development and
procurement of nuclear war technologies
of the equipment with which to fight and
the Pentagon presumes when a nuclear war
again your premise is at 36 billion
dollars a year in the last three years
of the Reagan administration the first
year to the Bush administration is being
hidden from the American people and
spent on weapons in the Defense
Department oh and on the intelligence
budget
what's with a CIA budget every year the
CIA's budget is running in the four
billion dollar range it is that budget
is dwarfed by too much larger and much
more expensive intelligence agencies the
National Security Agency which conducts
electronic eavesdropping around the
world and whose budget is in excess of
12 billion dollars a year and the
National Reconnaissance Office that we
talked about this budget runs in excess
of seven eight billion dollars a year in
their all-in-all the budget for
intelligence is in excess of twenty five
billion dollars a year the remainder of
the black budget in the ten billion
dollar range is for weapons and war
technologies how much of that twenty
five billion can be seen in a budget in
the federal budget sent up by the
president any of it not aligned how much
of it has ever discussed publicly at the
Congress and one way or the a very very
little how many members of Congress know
about twenty five billion dollars being
spent on intelligence the heads of the
Senate Intelligence Committee and of the
House Intelligence Committee have a good
overview of how that money is spent the
junior members generally are in on when
they have time for it because these are
busy people
whatever testimony the folks from the
various agencies deliver in closed
session
isn't that the way democracy is supposed
to work in closed session absolutely not
public officials elected by the public
sent here to do the public's business
know this information deal with it in
committee but it's because of our
concerns about international governments
knowing this kind of stuff if they
withhold from the public again I do not
argue in this book and no one in his
right mind would argue that the
Constitution demands the disclosure of
intelligence sources or methods nor do I
argue that the Pentagon should be
compelled to disclose technologies
that's working on or state-of-the-art
designs but the money is supposed to
under the scheme devised by the framers
of the Constitution be reported to the
public with the intelligence budget in
the past three different sort of
Commission's or investigative bodies
have looked at this question the
Rockefeller Commission set up by
President Ford in the wake of CIA abuses
being disclosed the Senate Intelligence
Committee and the Church Committee that
looked into various abuses of secret
spending in the 70s all concluded that
the disclosure of a lump sum an
aggregate sum for the National
Intelligence budget would a not harm
national security and be is the kind of
information that ought to be available
in an open democracy when it comes to
weapons systems the line items for
individual weapons systems that is
surely information that ought to be
available to us and les aspin who's
hardly a wild-eyed leftist is on record
as agreeing with that you say he's a
hardly a wild I had left us he's a
Democrat from Wisconsin true that
doesn't make him some sort of radical I
said he's hardly a wild-eyed left it's
these he's this is a man who is in the
mainstream of American politics les
aspin used to work in the Pentagon I
believe he did as a matter of fact
worked for Secretary of Defense McNamara
in 60s he's an economist by profession
the man knows the value of a defense
dollar
you've got some more people want to ask
you but you're the last three Jeffrey
Richardson Richardson was Jeff Mason
sure and Steve gull stir of the National
Security Archive now this is a
fascinating depository of declassified
documents that's an invaluable resource
to researchers in Washington again set
up excuse me with foundation money it
functions for example say I get several
thousand pages of declassified documents
through the Freedom of Information Act I
after plundering them for whatever
information I want can give them to the
National Security Archive and then other
researchers and historians and reporters
have access to those papers and what the
archive does is in effect collate and
index the declassified documents of the
government in a way that really is
unique it will be of great value to
future historians of this era who pays
the bill for the National Security
Archive again they received funding from
organizations like although I'm not
positive the Ford Foundation Stewart
Mott sort of good government
philanthropies and what's the expertise
of the three people of Steve Golf sir
Jeff niacin and Jeffrey Richardson
archivists indexers researchers
Richardson is has been a professor of
government at American University and
has written in half a dozen excellent
books on the structure and history of
American intelligence agencies what do
you say to the critics on the right that
are gonna read that list they just
another list of liberals anti-military
anti-big government groups that are
feeding Tim whiner this information
first of all the information they're
feeding me
and helping me interpret are the records
of the government all right
there's no spin on this my approach to
the problem of secret spending is that
the Constitution calls for a full
accounting of how the government spends
our tax money and that the black budgets
growth and scope is a challenge to that
promise I believe that we have under the
veil of excessive secrecy squandered a
great deal of our national treasure on
weaponry that will prove useless and on
foreign policy schemes such as the
iran-contra affair that have shamed our
nation and that in the tug of war
between secrecy and democracy that we
need a little tug back towards openness
here's the dedication page to Herbert
and Dora with love my parents who taught
me to love words and ideas and language
what do they think of all the stuff that
you're involved in mmm they're proud
they're proud I mean they write books
too and it was my mother who's a
historian by profession who first
inculcated me with the value of digging
up documents there's a I've got the New
York Times from Sunday right actually
this is being taped so this is Sunday
September the let me find it here so
that those people don't like to get
these sixteenths I believe you're right
1636 billion worth of secrets reviewed
by Lawrence Korb who used to be an
assistant secretary of defense now at
the Brookings right mr. Reiner does an
excellent job of describing the history
of the creation of the black budget and
pointing out the abuses that can occur
when public disclosure is limited blank
checks should be read for that reason
alone so far so good
then he says however in too many places
he undermines the impact of his thesis
with his simplistic analysis
example he treats all the abuses of the
black budget equally a group of army
Colonels spending black budget money on
hookers personal trips and four-star
hotels is hardly a threat to our
national security and not on a par with
the iran-contra affair yet both episodes
get equal treatment well with due
respect to mr. Corp I tried to delineate
a difference in the book between the
violation of law and the violation of
army regulations in the first instance
and a challenge to the Constitution of
the United States and the second
interest of it in the in the second in
incidents the iran-contra affair I tried
to make that delineation clear and I'm
sorry if I didn't make it clear enough
for him by the way how much money is
being spent for hookers and for stock oh
well this is this is this was a case in
which the US Army tried to create a kind
of a hard-charging prog aid of secret
soldiers that was going to be a kind of
a hybrid of the Green Beret in the CIA
and what happened was that this cadre
gained of access to unauthorized funds
324 million dollars worth before they
were shut down and you had a situation
this is based on records released
through the Freedom of Information Act
of the Army's own investigation of this
affair you had soldiers in mufti running
around with suitcases filled with cash
kind of running their own agenda
and the Secretary of the army from 1981
89 Shaun Marsh characterized the affair
as the precursor of the iran-contra
affair I certainly don't mean to give
the impression that the violations of
laws and army regulations these
gentlemen were court-martialed in secret
why why were they court-martialed in
secret because their existence was
supposed to be a secret it was the first
secret court-martials courts-martial I'm
sorry since Vietnam in almost 20 years
I did not mean to convey the impression
that their violation of federal law and
army regulations was equal to or greater
than the constitutional challenges that
iran-contra presented what I did mean to
present and the Secretary of the army in
that era John Marsh says so himself as I
quote him in my book I did mean to
present this incident as a precursor to
the iran-contra affair one other line I
want to ask you about in Lawrence corbs
review by the way what do you think is
really I thought he was generous in
places I think that he has every right
to disagree with my analysis I think
that he is a wise gentleman and that his
experience in the Pentagon may color his
perception of my book
mr. whiner mixes up so many questions in
his book it will have less impact than
his articles well if it had an equal
impact to my articles and who was
awarded the kind of recognition the
articles would I be shocked myself I
think that well first of all I disagree
that I've conflated questions of law or
constitutionality or of government
secrecy in this book
mr. Korb seems to suggest in his review
that he concedes for example yes
too much is classified yes there were
too many blank checks in the Reagan
administration yes there needs to be
greater disclosure of what the
government classifies the secret what he
seems to want is a kind of a convivial
consensus between the executive and the
legislative branches
of government that will allow just the
right amount of secrecy to protect our
national security and would that that
could happen but it does not it is not
the case there is and will continue to
be a struggle between the desire of the
executive branch to increase its powers
under the national security vision first
framed in the early days of the Cold War
and the desire of elected
representatives for greater disclosure
this is what makes democracy a wonderful
dogfight it's this continuing tug of war
the vision of comity that will allow
just the right amount of secrecy out
that mr. Corbyn visions is not the way
things are you wrote your newspaper
articles in 88 they were published in 87
in 87 mm-hmm you now have a book in 1990
right you said you got a couple of
prizes one out of this particular one
the poster prize has there been any
other tangible result on that you know I
hope so and I would not attribute it to
my articles back in 87 but to a slew of
other reporting by a cadre of reporters
and to the iran-contra investigation
itself I think that we go through cycles
of corruption and reform in this country
and that what happened when the
iran-contra affair fell apart was that
we saw and this was the conclusion of
the majority report of the iran-contra
committees that I believe their phrase
was a cabal of zealots had stolen a
great deal of political power in this
country and they attributed their theft
of that constitutional power to
excessive secrecy
um I think that that was an accurate
analysis and I think that now has we
begin by consensus to push some of these
weapons programs into the light to
examine them for what they are that an
intelligent result will occur but you
cannot argue about stuff that's
classified at the level that the stealth
bomber was you cannot debate it and so
decisions get made without sufficient
information programs tend to perpetuate
themselves without informed debate how
much of all of what you're talking about
in the black budget should be kept
secret no matter what intelligence
sources and methods you don't want for
example to know that a head of state is
on the CIA's payroll are there many well
in the 70s Jordan's King Hussein was on
the CIA's payroll that's been publicly
acknowledged by the United States
government um you don't want to disclose
the ways in which intelligence is
gathered because that will cut off the
flow of the intelligence what you need
to do given the economic trouble we find
ourselves in in this country is to make
intelligent choices of how we spend our
money and we cannot write a blank check
to the Pentagon or to the intelligence
agencies there has to be some level of
informed debate about the level of
spending secret weapons and secret
programs soak up in this country let me
give you an example I'm able to write
about we're able to discuss the stealth
bomber because it's been partly
Declassified after ten years of secret
research and development now
we have at this hour as we speak on the
18th of September a serious serious need
for defense strength in the Persian Gulf
the stealth bomber designed for nuclear
war against the Soviet Union is so
expensive that one of them would support
an entire division of troops in the
Saudi desert for a year you've got to
have which cost how much 900 million
dollars you've got to be able to make
intelligent choices we're going around
the world with our hat in our hand
seeking money from foreign governments
to support this mission because we have
dedicated so much of our treasure so
much of our brainpower to these highly
costly dubiously valued nuclear war
technologies we can now because of its
declassification debate whether we need
a stealth bomber but there are a hundred
other nuclear war technologies buried in
the black budget about which there can
be no debate a hundred others related
nuclear war technologies give us an
example well one that's just peeking its
nose out into the light is the Milstar
satellite system which I write about at
length and blank check well lay before
you explain that when was the last word
written for this book the afterword was
rewritten in May of 1990 and previous to
that when did you stop write in the book
about a year ago the fall of 1989 and I
made minor revisions for clarity and as
an updates while the book was being
edited by the publishers why did it take
so long to get a book out it always
takes nine months from the from the
submission of a manuscript or it
traditionally takes nine months from the
submission of a manuscript to the
appearance of a book anybody ever tell
you why I heard that so often what's the
9-month thing it beats me it's a
baffling process perhaps it goes back to
the gestation of a fetus in the womb
we'll come back to the mill star just a
second
this book is published by warner books
threat at 2195 correct if you could have
would you have changed anything in here
after what happened over in the Gulf did
that have any impact then I mean other
words I'm getting at people go by this
book today it'll be out of date in any
way oh no I don't think so um the the
weapon systems that I discussed in the
book our weapon systems geared for a
full-tilt nuclear war against the Soviet
Union those weapon systems still exist
they're still in the budget we continue
to build them as if the events of the
last 18 months had never happened
Congress as we speak is weighing the
value of these programs but I believe
that the information is fresh and the
events of the last six weeks and the
Persian Gulf in no way alter the facts
or the conclusions I'm sorry Milstar
okay a classic example of a military
system developed under the black budget
it's now just been Declassified enough
so that we can discuss it intelligently
Milstar is an acronym it's short for the
military strategic tactical and relay
system imagine the network as a
constellation of eight to ten satellites
in space in geosynchronous orbit
twenty-two thousand three hundred miles
from Earth
linked by three to four thousand ground
stations on earth kind of computer
terminals broadcast dishes the purpose
of Milstar is to enable the survivors of
the National Command Authority the
president and his top military aides the
survivors of the first days and weeks of
a nuclear war to continue to broadcast
the go codes and launch orders for the
firing of nuclear weaponry
after the Pentagon after the White House
after Washington after strategic
American Air Command headquarters in
Omaha are destroyed Milstar would weave
together our fragmented forces so that
the war envisioned could continue in the
United States would emerge victorious
a six-month nuclear war that was the
design requirement under which Milstar
was built and its cost once you include
the cost of the rockets to launch the
satellites and the various
reconfigurations of the electronic
network will be somewhere in the 30 to
40 billion dollar range why is it
becoming public because it a is so
expensive that it's very difficult to
hide in the black budget the request for
next year's appropriation is more than a
billion dollars - it has to be sold
because it is controversial because it
is tremendously expensive it has to be
sold in the political marketplace it has
to be sold to Congress as a whole this
was the case with the Strategic Defense
in it initiative Star Wars Star Wars was
largely kept out of the black world
although some of its component parts are
very highly classified because it was so
radical a notion that it had to be sold
in the political marketplace this is why
many people the Pentagon don't like
black programs because you can't talk
about him he can't sell them and it it's
it's a nimac 'el - good science to have
compartmentalization of different parts
of a very complicated military program
to have the people working on different
aspects of it kept from talking to one
another former President James Madison
former Supreme Court justice Joseph
story former Supreme Court justice Hugo
black former President Dwight Eisenhower
Lord Acton all of these people are
quoted throughout your book are you sure
you're not a political scientist rather
than a journalist you never took a
political science course in my life why
do you love to read why let me see if I
can find it in the opening pages here
you use a quote from Hugo black the
guarding of military and diplomatic
secrets at the expense of inform
representative government provides no
real security for our Republic the
United States Supreme Court justice Hugo
black from Alabama who was also a
senator why did you quote it I couldn't
agree with him more first of all I say
second of all that statement comes from
one of the great confrontations in our
constitutional history between the
government and the
press was the Pentagon Papers case and
the Supreme Court ruled precisely as
justice Black said that if you're going
to set up a balancing test between the
guarding of official secrets and the
functioning of an informed
representative government you got to
give more weight to public information
and I think failure to follow that
dictate gets this nation into trouble I
forgot to mention one world famous
philosopher bill Richards hi why he oh
he gets a whole chapter chapter 9 he
gets the bulk of the last chapter of the
book why Bill Richardson is a delightful
man now in his 70s and a true patriot
who became the focus of one of the most
interesting in one of the least known
Supreme Court cases of the 1970s bill
served this country in World War two and
in the Korean War he served in various
military intelligence and communications
capacities the man loves this country he
knows the value of secret intelligence
one day in 1967 he picked up his morning
paper and read that the CIA was funding
student groups subsidizing trade unions
in this country bill knows how the CIA
is supposed to work and bill knows his
Constitution and he thought correctly
that the CIA was violating its charter
bill picked up put down the newspaper
and sat down to his typewriter and wrote
a letter to the secretary of the
Treasury to the Department of the
Treasury to the Bureau of the budget and
said I believe that I have a right as a
citizen a taxpayer and a voter to know
how my money is being spent and I'd like
to see a copy of the CIA's budget they
wrote back to him and said mr.
Richardson we don't have it he after
extended correspondence went down to the
federal courthouse in Pittsburgh near
where he lived
and filed a very well drawn up lawsuit
against the federal government seeking
the information he believed he had a
right to have he was opposed in court by
the then United States Attorney in
western Pennsylvania Richard Thornberg
now the Attorney General of the United
States in the district court he lost he
appealed he went to the federal appeals
court and he won the appeals court
sitting on bank meaning every sitting
justice in the appeals court heard the
case because it addressed a heretofore
unresolved question of federal law what
appeals court again that's the Third
Circuit sitting in Philadelphia they
said that Richardson did have the right
to this information and that the
Constitution promised it to him
and that he as a citizen and a voter in
a tax payer had the absolute right to
seek the information promised him that
decision came down in 1971 when
government secrecy in this country was
at its zenith and government deception
in this country was at its height that
deception eventually resulted in the
resignation of the president the
government sat up and took judicial
notice of mr. Richardson's victory in
the appeals court and appealed a
decision it went to the Supreme Court in
1973 Robert Bork was then the Solicitor
General the case the decision in the
case came down in 74 right before
Richard Nixon's resignation
Richardson lost five to four just Chief
Justice burger writing the majority
opinion said look the United States is
not an Athenian democracy it is not a
New England town meeting and we don't
have to listen to every Tom Dick and
Harry with a constitutional beef Justice
Douglas in a fiery dissent said
Richardson has the right to this
information and by denying it to him by
a five to four vote we give a new
imprimatur to government secrecy to
excessive government
see in many ways I wrote this book for
William Richardson where is he today
he's living in Greensburg Pennsylvania
and what's he doing he's reading he's in
retirement he's 72 I guess and he is
continuing to think about the issues
that he raised long ago for every famous
victory in the Supreme Court there are a
hundred people like Bill Richardson
how'd you find him by knowing the case
how'd you know the case it's a classic
in the confrontation between excessive
secrecy and the democracy pom promised
by the Constitution our guest the last
hour has been the author of this book
blank check the Pentagon's black budget
his name is Tim whiner and he works for
the Philadelphia Inquirer and is based
here in Washington it's been a pleasure
thank you thank you sir